Hi, my name is Brian Caffo, and welcome
to the lecture on asymptotics as part of
the statistical inference class in
the Courseera data science specialization.
This class is co-taught by my
co-instructors, Jeff Leek and
Roger Peng, relative to Johns Hopkins
Bloomberg School of Public Health.
So, asymptotics is the term for
the behavior of statistics as the sample
size or some other relevant quantity of
limits to infinity or, in some cases
as something else limits to zero.
We're going to deal only with
the case with the sample size is
the quantity that's limiting to infinity.
Asymptopia is my name for
the land of asymptotics where everything
works out well and it should work out
well because there's an infinite amount
of data in the land of Asymptopia.
So, asymptotics are incredibly useful for
simple statistical inference and
approximations.
Asymptotics are like a little swiss
army knife that you can pull out
to investigate the statistical
properties of many statistics,
without having to do much computing.
So, asymptotics also form the basis for
frequency interpretation of probabilities.
For example, everyone kind of intuitively
knows that if you flip a coin and
take the proportion of heads that that
should limit to 0.5 for a fair coin.
That property is the so
called law of large numbers that
we'll explore here in a minute.
Fortunately, instead of diving into
the mathematics of the limits of
random variables, there's a set of
powerful tools that we can rely on.
These results allow us to talk about
the large sample distribution of
behavior sample means of
a collection of iid observations.
The first of these, we already intuitively
know, the so-called Law of Large Numbers.
It says that the average limits to what
it's estimating, the population means.
So for example,
the average could be the result of n coin
flips, the sample proportion of heads.
As we flip a fair coin over and
over, it eventually converges to
the true probability of a head.
Let's show the law of
large numbers in action.
[SOUND] I'm going to set my
number of simulations to be 1000.
Then I'm going to generate
a thousand random normals, and
I'm going to take their cumulative sum.
Then dividing the cumulative sums by
1 over n gives the cumulative means.
In other words, the mean of
the first observation by itself,
then the mean of the first and the second
observation, then the mean of the first,
second, and third observation,
[SOUND] and so on.
What you see when you plot the cumulative
means by the index is early on,
there's a lot of variability in the mean,
but
then as time goes on, not as time as
the number of simulation goes on.
We get closer and closer to the true
population value which is zero.
[SOUND] Let's do it again,
only this time let's ask r to flip a coin
rather than generate standard normals.
So the function sample,
when I give the arguments 0 and
1, samples from the elements 0 and
1 with equal probability.
Here I want n of them, 1,000.
And replace equals TRUE, just means
that I want to sample with replacement.
So this command is exactly flipping
a coin 1,000 times where 0 is a tail and
1 is a head.
I'm taking again,
the cumulative sum, and then dividing it
by 1 to n to get the cumulative means.
When I plot the cumulative means,
what I see again is variability in
the sample proportion early on.
But as the number of coin flips going into
the sample proportion goes to infinity it
converges to the true value,
which is 0.5, which is right there.
[SOUND] Let's have a brief discussion.
We define an estimator as consistent if it
converges to what you want to estimate.
So, for example, the sample proportion
from iid coin flips is consistent for
the true success probability of a coin.
As you flip a coin over and over, the
sample proportion of heads converges to
the probability of getting
a head on that coin.
The law of large numbers says that
the sample mean of iid samples is
consistent for the population mean.
This is a very good property to have,
because it's basically saying,
if we go to the trouble of collecting
an infinite amount of data,
we get exactly the right answer.
But it's not only true that sample means
are consistent, the sample variance and
the sample standard deviation of iid
random variables are consistent as well.